README.md, before:

# echowatch
EchoWatch – Documenting Anti-Igbo Hate Speech in Nigeria’s 2023 Elections

# EchoWatch – Documenting Anti-Igbo Hate Speech in Nigeria’s 2023 Elections  

[![License: MIT](https://img.shields.io/badge/License-MIT-green.svg)](LICENSE)  
![GitHub Repo stars](https://img.shields.io/github/stars/Gtstride/echowatch?style=social)  
![GitHub issues](https://img.shields.io/github/issues/Gtstride/echowatch)  
![GitHub forks](https://img.shields.io/github/forks/Gtstride/echowatch?style=social)  
![Contributions Welcome](https://img.shields.io/badge/contributions-welcome-brightgreen.svg)  

---

## Acknowledgment  
Before diving into the report proper, I would like to extend my heartfelt appreciation to the entire **WITNESS team and organization**. Being selected as one of the few to benefit from this impactful initiative has been both an honor and a responsibility I deeply value. This opportunity not only strengthened my commitment to public interest technology but also allowed me to kickstart my contribution to meaningfully addressing ethnic hate speech in Nigeria.

---

## 1. Project Overview
- **Project Title:** EchoWatch – Documenting Incidents of Anti-Igbo Hate Speech in Nigeria’s 2023 Elections  
- **Cohort Member:** Godstime Agho  
- **Duration:** November 2024 – June 2025  
- **Location/Communities/Platform Engaged:** Primarily X.com (Twitter), Igbo communities, civic actors, digital rights defenders, journalists, and civic tech observers  

**Brief Summary**  
EchoWatch is a public interest technology project focused on identifying and documenting hate speech targeted at the Igbo ethnic group during Nigeria’s 2023 general elections. The project primarily focused on online platforms—particularly X.com—to identify and classify hate speech patterns and raise awareness of the impact of this ethnic digital violence. It contributes to longer-term efforts to counter digital harm and protect democratic participation.

---

## 2. What I Did & Why It Mattered  

### Key Objectives
- Identify and document hate speech incidents targeting the Igbo ethnic group during the 2023 elections  
- Create a structured dataset for research and advocacy  
- Establish a GitHub repository for collaboration and continuity  
- Contribute to a longer-term database of ethnic hate speech  

### Activities
- Reviewed hate speech lexicons and prior documentation efforts  
- Collected and categorized **8+ hate speech instances** from X.com  
- Conducted **3 expert interviews** with investigators and analysts  
- Classified and archived tweets based on type, context, and platform  
- Built a Google spreadsheet and GitHub repository for structured storage  

### Results & Impact
- Developed a dataset with hate speech samples, including **statement, source, and context**  
- Highlighted how ethnic profiling and disinformation shaped voter suppression and political exclusion  
- Strengthened personal and community capacity in digital research, ethics, and documentation  
- Received ongoing feedback from collaborators and mentors on the value of the work  

---

## 3. Methodology  

The methodology for EchoWatch combined specifally **manual monitoring, and expert consultations**.  

### Step 1 – Platform Selection  
- Focused primarily on **X.com (Twitter)** due to its role in shaping public political conversations in Nigeria.  
- Telegram and Nairaland were initially considered but later deprioritized to ensure focus and consistency.  

### Step 2 – Keyword Development  
- Reviewed prior studies and hate speech lexicons.  
- Developed a list of search terms including ethnic slurs, political phrases, and coded language used during the 2023 elections.  
- Iteratively refined keywords with feedback from mentors and after running trial searches.  

### Step 3 – Data Collection  
- Used **X Advanced Search operators** ([documentation](https://help.x.com/en/using-x/x-advanced-search)) and open-source methods to collect tweets.  
- Manually tracked posts and verified authenticity by checking context and accounts.  
- Screenshots were taken for preservation in case of content deletion.  

### Step 4 – Classification  
- Each hate speech incident was logged into a structured dataset with these fields:  
  - **Handle / Source**  
  - **Text of statement**  
  - **Hate speech type** (e.g., ethnic, political, xenophobic, disinformation)  
  - **Date of incident**  
  - **Context / Notes**  
- Classification followed definitions adapted from human rights and digital rights frameworks.  

### Step 5 – Archiving & Storage  
- Data stored in an **Excel spreadsheet** and shared via GitHub for transparency.  
- Sensitive details were handled with care to avoid amplifying harmful speech.  

### Step 6 – Expert Input  
- Conducted **interviews with 3 experts** (investigators, analysts, and digital rights actors) to validate methodology and refine approach.  

---

## 4. Reflections  

### Challenges
- **Keyword complexity:** Subtle and coded language made detection difficult  
- **Tool limitations:** Relied on manual and open-source methods due to high costs of scraping tools  
- **Volume vs. focus:** Narrowed scope to X.com for consistency  

### Lessons Learned
- Start small: a few strong, well-documented cases matter more than scattered data  
- Collaboration is key: guidance from mentors helped shape direction  
- Ethical responsibility: sensitive documentation requires care and discretion  

**Community Feedback**: Interviewees and colleagues noted this project was long overdue and useful for research and advocacy.  

---

## 5. What’s Next?  
- Expand the dataset to cover future elections or incidents where ethnic hate resurfaces  
- Recruit data collectors with clear guidelines to scale collection  
- Explore partnerships with civic tech groups, researchers, or institutions  
- Develop visualization or public-facing resources from the data  

---

## 6. Sample Data Table  

Below is a snapshot of some documented hate speech incidents:  

| Handle                        | Text from the tweet                                                   | Hate Speech Type                                                                             | Date       |
|:------------------------------|:----------------------------------------------------------------------|:---------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------|:-----------|
| https://x.com/aonanuga1956    | Let 2023 be the last time of Igbo interference in Lagos politics…      | Ethnic & Tribal Hate Speech, Political Hate Speech, Xenophobic Hate Speech                   | 2023-03-18 |
| https://x.com/@Spotlight_Abby | Sisi Yemmie… and her husband were prevented from voting in Lagos…      | Political Suppression, Ethnic Profiling, Ethnic & Tribal Hate Speech                         | 2023-03-18 |
| https://x.com/IamaGoodSoldier | What do you expect… the guy is IPOB in disguise… Rejecting Obi…       | Political Hate Speech, Ethnic & Tribal Hate Speech, Ethnic Profiling, Harmful Disinformation | 2023-02-23 |
| https://x.com/ThatVyktur      | Meet Chinedu Rhodes-Vivour… He is IPOB/Biafra supporter… Protect…     | Harmful Disinformation, Political Hate Speech, Ethnic & Tribal Hate Speech, Ethnic Profiling | 2023-01-03 |
| https://x.com/renoomokri      | I Only Supported IPOB Up To a Point – Gbadebo Rhodes-Vivour…          | Disinformation/Misleading Content, Harmful Disinformation                                    | 2023-03-07 |

---

## 7. Media/Documentation
- 📊 Dataset: `Documneting Incidents of Hate Speech during 2023 General Election.xlsx`  
- 📝 Interview Notes (unpublished)  
- 📂 Working Docs (Google Drive)  

---

## 8. Contributing  

We welcome contributions to **EchoWatch**! Here’s how you can help:  

1. **Fork the repository** on GitHub  
2. **Clone your fork** locally  
   ```bash
   git clone https://github.com/your-username/echowatch.git
   cd echowatch

Commit message:

Updated README file with the CONTRIBUTING.md Section

README.md, after:

# echowatch
EchoWatch – Documenting Anti-Igbo Hate Speech in Nigeria’s 2023 Elections

# EchoWatch – Documenting Anti-Igbo Hate Speech in Nigeria’s 2023 Elections  

[![License: MIT](https://img.shields.io/badge/License-MIT-green.svg)](LICENSE)  
![GitHub Repo stars](https://img.shields.io/github/stars/Gtstride/echowatch?style=social)  
![GitHub issues](https://img.shields.io/github/issues/Gtstride/echowatch)  
![GitHub forks](https://img.shields.io/github/forks/Gtstride/echowatch?style=social)  
![Contributions Welcome](https://img.shields.io/badge/contributions-welcome-brightgreen.svg)  

---

## Acknowledgment  
Before diving into the report proper, I would like to extend my heartfelt appreciation to the entire **WITNESS team and organization**. Being selected as one of the few to benefit from this impactful initiative has been both an honor and a responsibility I deeply value. This opportunity not only strengthened my commitment to public interest technology but also allowed me to kickstart my contribution to meaningfully addressing ethnic hate speech in Nigeria.

---

## 1. Project Overview
- **Project Title:** EchoWatch – Documenting Incidents of Anti-Igbo Hate Speech in Nigeria’s 2023 Elections  
- **Cohort Member:** Godstime Agho  
- **Duration:** November 2024 – June 2025  
- **Location/Communities/Platform Engaged:** Primarily X.com (Twitter), Igbo communities, civic actors, digital rights defenders, journalists, and civic tech observers  

**Brief Summary**  
EchoWatch is a public interest technology project focused on identifying and documenting hate speech targeted at the Igbo ethnic group during Nigeria’s 2023 general elections. The project primarily focused on online platforms—particularly X.com—to identify and classify hate speech patterns and raise awareness of the impact of this ethnic digital violence. It contributes to longer-term efforts to counter digital harm and protect democratic participation.

---

## 2. What I Did & Why It Mattered  

### Key Objectives
- Identify and document hate speech incidents targeting the Igbo ethnic group during the 2023 elections  
- Create a structured dataset for research and advocacy  
- Establish a GitHub repository for collaboration and continuity  
- Contribute to a longer-term database of ethnic hate speech  

### Activities
- Reviewed hate speech lexicons and prior documentation efforts  
- Collected and categorized **8+ hate speech instances** from X.com  
- Conducted **3 expert interviews** with investigators and analysts  
- Classified and archived tweets based on type, context, and platform  
- Built a Google spreadsheet and GitHub repository for structured storage  

### Results & Impact
- Developed a dataset with hate speech samples, including **statement, source, and context**  
- Highlighted how ethnic profiling and disinformation shaped voter suppression and political exclusion  
- Strengthened personal and community capacity in digital research, ethics, and documentation  
- Received ongoing feedback from collaborators and mentors on the value of the work  

---

## 3. Methodology  

The methodology for EchoWatch combined specifally **manual monitoring, and expert consultations**.  

### Step 1 – Platform Selection  
- Focused primarily on **X.com (Twitter)** due to its role in shaping public political conversations in Nigeria.  
- Telegram and Nairaland were initially considered but later deprioritized to ensure focus and consistency.  

### Step 2 – Keyword Development  
- Reviewed prior studies and hate speech lexicons.  
- Developed a list of search terms including ethnic slurs, political phrases, and coded language used during the 2023 elections.  
- Iteratively refined keywords with feedback from mentors and after running trial searches.  

### Step 3 – Data Collection  
- Used **X Advanced Search operators** ([documentation](https://help.x.com/en/using-x/x-advanced-search)) and open-source methods to collect tweets.  
- Manually tracked posts and verified authenticity by checking context and accounts.  
- Screenshots were taken for preservation in case of content deletion.  

### Step 4 – Classification  
- Each hate speech incident was logged into a structured dataset with these fields:  
  - **Handle / Source**  
  - **Text of statement**  
  - **Hate speech type** (e.g., ethnic, political, xenophobic, disinformation)  
  - **Date of incident**  
  - **Context / Notes**  
- Classification followed definitions adapted from human rights and digital rights frameworks.  

### Step 5 – Archiving & Storage  
- Data stored in an **Excel spreadsheet** and shared via GitHub for transparency.  
- Sensitive details were handled with care to avoid amplifying harmful speech.  

### Step 6 – Expert Input  
- Conducted **interviews with 3 experts** (investigators, analysts, and digital rights actors) to validate methodology and refine approach.  

---

## 4. Reflections  

### Challenges
- **Keyword complexity:** Subtle and coded language made detection difficult  
- **Tool limitations:** Relied on manual and open-source methods due to high costs of scraping tools  
- **Volume vs. focus:** Narrowed scope to X.com for consistency  

### Lessons Learned
- Start small: a few strong, well-documented cases matter more than scattered data  
- Collaboration is key: guidance from mentors helped shape direction  
- Ethical responsibility: sensitive documentation requires care and discretion  

**Community Feedback**: Interviewees and colleagues noted this project was long overdue and useful for research and advocacy.  

---

## 5. What’s Next?  
- Expand the dataset to cover future elections or incidents where ethnic hate resurfaces  
- Recruit data collectors with clear guidelines to scale collection  
- Explore partnerships with civic tech groups, researchers, or institutions  
- Develop visualization or public-facing resources from the data  

---

## 6. Sample Data Table  

Below is a snapshot of some documented hate speech incidents:  

| Handle                        | Text from the tweet                                                   | Hate Speech Type                                                                             | Date       |
|:------------------------------|:----------------------------------------------------------------------|:---------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------|:-----------|
| https://x.com/aonanuga1956    | Let 2023 be the last time of Igbo interference in Lagos politics…      | Ethnic & Tribal Hate Speech, Political Hate Speech, Xenophobic Hate Speech                   | 2023-03-18 |
| https://x.com/@Spotlight_Abby | Sisi Yemmie… and her husband were prevented from voting in Lagos…      | Political Suppression, Ethnic Profiling, Ethnic & Tribal Hate Speech                         | 2023-03-18 |
| https://x.com/IamaGoodSoldier | What do you expect… the guy is IPOB in disguise… Rejecting Obi…       | Political Hate Speech, Ethnic & Tribal Hate Speech, Ethnic Profiling, Harmful Disinformation | 2023-02-23 |
| https://x.com/ThatVyktur      | Meet Chinedu Rhodes-Vivour… He is IPOB/Biafra supporter… Protect…     | Harmful Disinformation, Political Hate Speech, Ethnic & Tribal Hate Speech, Ethnic Profiling | 2023-01-03 |
| https://x.com/renoomokri      | I Only Supported IPOB Up To a Point – Gbadebo Rhodes-Vivour…          | Disinformation/Misleading Content, Harmful Disinformation                                    | 2023-03-07 |

---

## 7. Media/Documentation
- 📊 Dataset: `Documneting Incidents of Hate Speech during 2023 General Election.xlsx`  
- 📝 Interview Notes (unpublished)  
- 📂 Working Docs (Google Drive)  

---

## 8. Contributing  

We welcome contributions to **EchoWatch**! expand and refine the dataset or improve documentation. Here’s how you can help:  

1. **Fork the repository** on GitHub  
2. **Clone your fork** locally  
   ```bash
   git clone https://github.com/your-username/echowatch.git
   cd echowatch
3. Dont forget to read our detailed [Contributing Guidelines](./CONTRIBUTING.md) for step-by-step instructions.
